Bien: When I look back on my life,
thinking about how and where I grew up,
I didn't know anything.
In terms of my education, you know.
I didn't go to school because I was deaf.
So there was no education
for people who were deaf
in the Dominican Republic,
or at least not for me.
So I went through my life not really
having a way to communicate.
[music plays]
Rosanna: A person who is born blind,
visually impaired or DeafBlind
is born into a very different situation
than their average counterpart.
They have to learn skills
that are very, very different
in order to compete with their counterpart
in the sighted world.
Thinking back in my own life,
my parents really did not know what to do
or how to really work with a child
that was blind, and they were
kind of at a total loss.
Like, “okay, where is this child going to fit in?”
The doctors told
them that I was going to be
what they call an “LD child” at
that time, “learning lisabled.”
My mom really was very strong
and did not believe that the doctor
or psychiatrist at that
time was right about that.
And so she spent a lot of time
doing puzzles
with me and educational toys
to develop my brain.
I went on to nursery school
where my mom worked, by the way,
just so that I could be in nursery school
and be in an educational environment.
Bien: I was taken from my grandparents
to the Virgin Islands
to an island of Saint Croix
where I was put in school.
I mean, I'm saying this now.
I don't know what that meant.
It was a school for the deaf.
I was embarrassed.
I didn't know sign language, which is what
these folks were doing around me.
I didn't know how to answer questions.
And the teachers really tried
to convey information to me,
but it was really, really difficult.
I tried to learn words, quote unquote,
like the alphabet, and they would
show me pictures of the letter A
and then show me that in sign language.
But when I finally connected
what they were trying to do,
it was like a fire was lit inside of me.
I thought I was disabled, like I thought
really I had a developmental disability,
you know, at that time they called it
mental retardation.
And I didn't know what was going on.
But when they gave me this
visual language, this way to communicate,
I was like, “okay, bring it on.”
I guess I was like nine or ten years old
that I finally made the connection.
Learning began.
I had classes like
everybody else, math and gym
And with all of those classes,
so did my sign language expand.
So I really tried
to look forward, not back.
[music plays]
Bien: My mom then told me that I had
to go to New York, and I was like,
“Mommy are you sure?” and she convinced
me that this was the right thing for me.
So she bought the plane ticket
and I'm not going to lie, I cried.
But I got on the plane
and I flew to New York
and they put me in the Lexington School
for the Deaf.
Rosanna: I went on to public school.
It was only myself and one other girl
that was in the public school system
who were at that time
considered legally blind.
So I then began the challenge
of advocating for myself, of growing up.
I wanted to be like everybody else,
and that was my goal.
I wanted to be like my sighted friends.
I wanted to do what everybody else did.
I didn't want to be treated differently.
Bien: I'm not going to lie. It was hard.
But once I got it,
I really felt like I could fit in here!
I remember meeting the principal
and introducing myself and saying,
“Hi, my name is Bienvenido Batista.
Yeah, it's nice to meet you.”
And just sort of
taking everything in visually.
Everybody there was a signer.
And so my language grew there.
And I stayed there.
And I learned so much.
And, you know,
I just was where I belonged.
And I was with people
that I could be with.
And then I came to the
Helen Keller National Center
and coming here, man,
sent shivers up my spine.
I felt like this is where I needed to be.
I’m like, oh, this
is what a cane does?
And this is what Braille is like?
Let’s go, bring it on. Come on.
I want to learn everything
that I need to learn.
And I was excited to do so.
Rosanna: When I was in high school getting ready
to go to college, I had a state counselor
who honestly did not believe in me.
“I don't think you're college material and
I don't think you should go to college.
You might want to pursue
another avenue in your life.”
So he honestly
did not believe in me and like,
“no, you're not going to go to college.”
I went on, did very well in college.
You know, I graduated with a 3.5,
then decided to go on to graduate school.
They said, “really?
You really want to go to graduate school?”
Yeah, that's what I'm doing.
I did some work in the area of theology
at Saint John's University
for a couple of years.
Completed that, when on, later on
after I started working at JPMorgan Chase,
I decided to go back
to school again in 2008
and went on and did my MBA concentrating
in human resource management.
So I kind of not only surpassed the
stereotype that, Oh no,
you’re not college material to proving that,
Hey, I'm going to do this.
If you really want something
and you desire
something, you're going to
reach that goal.
But you really have to want it.
And if you really want it,
you can achieve it.
If there's any message
that I would send out
to the blind or DeafBlind community,
that is the message
that I would give.
[music ends]